Adding Parallel Binary Search module (#3859)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: content/6_Advanced/Parallel_Binary_Search.mdx

---
id: parallel-binary-search
title: 'Parallel Binary Search'
author: Muaath Alqarni

> description: 'Answering multiple binary search queries parallelly'

Reviewer: "parallelly"

Author: is it wrong? how to correct?

Reviewer: rewrite the description

prerequisites:

>   - binary-search

Reviewer: maybe D&Q too?

Author: you can do PBS iteratively, so it's not a request I think.

Reviewer: the idea is similar to D&Q no? Iterative implemention doesnt mean the idea isnt fundamentally s

Author: it's pretty similar yeah

frequency: 0
---

## Resources

<Resources>

> 	<Resource source="CF" title="Parallel Binary Seach [tutorial]" url="45578" />

Reviewer: Please put 2.1 of this book in resources 🙏
https://kostka.dev/sp/spbook.pdf

</Resources>

<FocusProblem problem="sam" />

## Solution - New Roads Queries

> Let's think how to binary search a single query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's think about how to binary search a single query.
```

> It's clear that we can use DSU with linear search, but also we can do binary search with DSU in $O(N \cdot \log_2{N})$.

Reviewer: Don't say "it's clear", demonstrate it, or add a link to another solution explanation for that

Now let's use parallel binary search:
Sweep through the array of edges and union them in the DSU,

> whenevery you find a query its median = $i$, if the two nodes where connected, it means shrink to left, otherwise shrink to right.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whenever there is a query with median = $i$, if the two nodes where connected, it means shrink to left, otherwise shrink to right.
```
What does shrink mean? What's the dividing factor? Also you mentioned $i$, so use it in your explanation.

> You need to do the sweep $O(\log_2{N})$ times, so you know the exact time the nodes where connected.

Reviewer: use "we" instead of "you". No real reason for this change, but it's to keep modules consistent

Also what does "so you know the exact time the nodes where connected." means? What does "time" represent?

Author: I should replace time with "amount of days", same as in the problem.

And you need to sort the queries by median before every sweep thats $O(Q \cdot \log_2{Q})$
And $O(\alpha{N})$ for the DSU

Total Complexity: $O((N + Q) \cdot \log_2{N}^2 \cdot \alpha{N})$

## Implementation - New Roads Queries
<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
#define ll long long
#define pii pair<int, int>
using namespace std;

const int N = 2e5 + 1;

int n, m, q;
vector<pii> edges;

struct dsu {
	int ccc = 0;  // Connected Components Count
	int cnt[N], par[N];
	void init(int sz) {
		ccc = sz;
		for (int i = 0; i <= sz; i++) par[i] = i, cnt[i] = 1;
	}
	int root(int node) {
		if (par[node] == node) return node;
		return root(par[node]);
	}

> 	bool link(int x, int y) {

Reviewer: you used "union" in your explanation. Be consistent

		x = root(x), y = root(y);
		if (cnt[x] < cnt[y]) swap(x, y);
		if (x == y) return false;
		par[y] = x;
		cnt[x] += cnt[y];
		ccc--;
		return true;
	}
};

// Parallel Binary Search Query
struct pbs {
  public:
	int idx, l, r;
	int a, b;
	int mid() { return (l + r) / 2; }
} qrs[N];

int main() {
	ios::sync_with_stdio(0), cin.tie(0);
	cin >> n >> m >> q;
	for (int i = 1; i <= m; i++) {
		int a, b;
		cin >> a >> b;
		if (a > b) swap(a, b);
		edges.push_back({a, b});
	}

	for (int i = 0; i < q; i++) {
		cin >> qrs[i].a >> qrs[i].b;
		qrs[i].idx = i;
		qrs[i].l = 1, qrs[i].r = m + 1;
	}

> 	dsu cur;

Reviewer: please rename it from `cur`

	int lg = ceil(log2(m));
	while (lg--) {
		cur.init(n);
		sort(qrs, qrs + q,
		     [](const pbs &x, const pbs &y) { return x.mid() < y.mid(); });
		int idx = 0;
		for (int i = 0; i < m; i++) {
			cur.link(edges[i].first, edges[i].second);

> 			while (idx < q && qrs[idx].mid() == i + 1) {

Reviewer: since this is the introductory problem, some comments are required

				if (qrs[idx].l >= qrs[idx].r) {
					idx++;
					continue;
				}
				if (cur.root(qrs[idx].a) == cur.root(qrs[idx].b))
					qrs[idx].r = qrs[idx].mid();
				else qrs[idx].l = qrs[idx].mid() + 1;
				idx++;
			}
			if (idx == q) break;
		}
	}
	sort(qrs, qrs + q,
	     [](const pbs &x, const pbs &y) { return x.idx < y.idx; });
	for (int i = 0; i < q; i++)

> 		cout << (qrs[i].l == m + 1 ? -1 : (qrs[i].a == qrs[i].b ? 0 : qrs[i].l))

Reviewer: please attempt to make this readable

---
id: parallel-binary-search
title: 'Parallel Binary Search'
author: Muaath Alqarni
description: 'Answer binary search queries offline'
prerequisites:
  - binary-search
  - divide-and-conquer
frequency: 0
---

## Resources

<Resources>
	<Resource source="CF" title="Parallel Binary Seach [tutorial]" url="45578" />
	<Resource source="SPBook" title="Parallel Binary Seach" url="https://kostka.dev/sp/spbook.pdf#page=22" />
</Resources>

<FocusProblem problem="sam" />

## Solution - New Roads Queries
We can see that connectivity of the nodes is a monotonic function.

> Now let's use parallel binary search:

Reviewer 2: give a quick summary on what pbs is and how one would use it
bc right now this is not different from a normal problem editorial

First, sort the queries by median.

Then sweep through the array of edges and union them in the DSU.
Whenever there is a query with median = $i$, if the two nodes where connected in DSU, it means the answer is $\leq i$, otherwise it means $\gt i$.

**Complexity:**

We need to do the sweep $O(\log_2{N})$ times, same as binary search.
Sorting the queries by median is $O(Q \cdot \log_2{Q})$
And $O(\alpha(N))$ for the DSU

Total Complexity: $O((N + Q) \cdot \log_2(N+Q)^2 \cdot \alpha(N))$

## Implementation - New Roads Queries
<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

const int N = 2e5 + 1;

struct DSU {
	int cnt[N], par[N];
	void Init(int sz) {
		for (int i = 0; i <= sz; i++) par[i] = i, cnt[i] = 1;
	}
	int Root(int node) {
		if (par[node] == node) return node;
		return Root(par[node]);
	}
	void Union(int x, int y) {
		x = Root(x), y = Root(y);
		if (cnt[x] < cnt[y]) swap(x, y);
		if (x == y) return;
		par[y] = x;
		cnt[x] += cnt[y];
	}
	bool Connected(int x, int y) { return Root(x) == Root(y); }
};

// Parallel Binary Search Query
struct PBS {
	// l, r are the binary search variables
	int idx, l, r;

> 	int a, b;

Reviewer: rename to `u` and `v`, just standard convention

Reviewer 2: i mean depends on the problem statement
unless this is an arbitrary struct

Author: I used a,b same as the problem statement

---
id: parallel-binary-search
title: 'Parallel Binary Search'
author: Muaath Alqarni

> description: 'Offline way to do multiple binary search on answer efficiently'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'Answer binary search queries offline'
```

prerequisites:
  - binary-search
  - divide-and-conquer
frequency: 0
---

## Resources

<Resources>
	<Resource source="CF" title="Parallel Binary Seach [tutorial]" url="45578" />
	<Resource source="SPBook" title="Parallel Binary Seach" url="https://kostka.dev/sp/spbook.pdf#page=22" />
</Resources>

<FocusProblem problem="sam" />

## Solution - New Roads Queries

> Let's think about how to use binary to answer single query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> We can see that connvectivity of the nodes is a monotonic function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see that connectivity of the nodes is a monotonic function.
```

Now let's use parallel binary search:

First, sort the queries by median.

> Then sweep through the array of edges and union them in the DSU,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then sweep through the array of edges and union them in the DSU.
```

> whenevery there is a query with median = $i$, if the two nodes where connected in DSU, it means the answer is $\leq i$, otherwise it means $\gt i$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever there is a query with median = $i$, if the two nodes where connected in DSU, it means the answer is $\leq i$, otherwise it means $\gt i$.
```

---
id: parallel-binary-search
title: 'Parallel Binary Search'
author: Muaath Alqarni
description: 'Answer binary search queries offline'
prerequisites:
  - binary-search
  - 'Divide & Conquer'
frequency: 0
---

## Resources

<Resources>
	<Resource source="CF" title="Parallel Binary Seach [tutorial]" url="45578" />
	<Resource source="SPBook" title="Parallel Binary Seach" url="https://kostka.dev/sp/spbook.pdf#page=22" />
</Resources>

## Tutorial
This technique is usually used when we can solve a single query by doing linear or binary search on monotonic function.

> The trick is doing it offline, sort queries by their median (initially $l$, $r$ will be the binary search values), do linear search,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The trick is doing it offline, sorting queries by their median (initially $l$, $r$ will be the binary search values), linearly searching
```

> whenever you find a query its median in same as your position in linear search, check the monotonic function, and do same as binary search (edit either $l$ or $r$).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
whenever you find a query its median in same as your position in linear search, checking the monotonic function, and binary searching (edit either $l$ or $r$).
```

> whenever you find a query its median in same as your position in linear search, check the monotonic function, and do same as binary search (edit either $l$ or $r$).

Reviewer 3: If that's what you meant, then resolve those changes. If not, then please rewrite that sentence since it doesn't really make sense right now.

> You will need to do the linear search $O(\log_2{N})$ times, so $l = r$.

Reviewer 3: Rewrite this... It sounds weird

> Usually the complexity would be: $O((N+Q) \cdot \log_2{(N+Q)}^2)$

Reviewer 3: This is an incomplete thought. Usually it's that time complexity but you should also state the time complexity of the parallel binary search following a ", but"

<FocusProblem problem="sam" />

> ## Solution - New Roads Queries

Reviewer 3: Definitely expand on this solution

> We can see that connectivity of the nodes is a monotonic function.

Reviewer 3: How

> Now let's use parallel binary search:

Reviewer 3: Combine these sentences in some way

When sweeping through the array of edges, union them in the DSU.

> Whenever there is a query with median = $i$, if the two nodes where connected in DSU, it means the answer is $\leq i$ ($r = i$), otherwise it means $\gt i$ ($l = i+1$).

Reviewer 3: Split this into two sentences since it's too wordy and grammatically incorrect
